Inflation Edged Up in December After Rapid Cooling Most of 2023
Pace of price increases was nearly half as strong as in 2022 and wages rose
By 
Gwynn Guilford
Follow and Nick Timiraos
Updated Jan. 11, 2024 1:27 pm ET

Core prices, which strip out volatile food and energy items, rose 0.3% in December from the prior month. PHOTO: ASH PONDERS/BLOOMBERG NEWS
Americans caught a big break last year as inflation fell by nearly half and paychecks grew, delivering real wage gains in 2023 for the first time in three years. 

Inflation’s cool down from historic highs keeps the Federal Reserve on track to hold rates steady later this month and contemplate cutting them later this year. But consumers aren’t in the clear yet; December’s data showed stubborn lingering pressures that suggest inflation isn’t fully beaten.

The consumer-price index increased 3.4% from a year earlier in December, an acceleration from November’s 3.1% advance, but well down from a 6.5% rise at the end of 2022, the Labor Department said Thursday. Inflation-adjusted wages rose 0.8% last year, a reversal after two full-year declines and a better gain than the year before the pandemic began.

“The progress on inflation since June 2022 has been remarkable,” said David Kelly, chief global strategist at J.P. Morgan Asset Management. “The bottom line is that the most likely path for inflation from here is not upwards or sideways but rather down.”

The rapid cooling of price increases has raised hopes of a soft landing, where inflation can be tamed without a surge in unemployment or a recession. 

The latest inflation data suggests prices aren’t continuing to fall as they had in late 2023. WSJ’s Dion Rabouin explains how that could play a big role in determining the Fed’s path in 2024. Photo: Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty Images
Americans paid more for rent, auto insurance and dentist visits in December, but less for furniture, toys and sporting goods. Overall prices climbed 0.3% from the prior month versus a 0.1% gain in November. Core prices, which strip out volatile food and energy items, rose 0.3% in December from the prior month, the same as November, and increased 3.9% from a year earlier, a slight slowing.

Many Americans remain frustrated after experiencing elevated inflation over the past four years, but they are seeing some relief.

Tyler Loehrl of Milwaukee said falling prices for some groceries, such as meat and eggs, and slower overall increases help him better manage expenses for his family, which includes toddler twins’ fast-growing appetites. In recent years, when grocery bills jumped, he would skip lunch. He also noticed his heating bill was down about a quarter from last year, though still up from 2021.

“Those price reductions have some ominous undertones—imminent recession, oddly warm temperatures, et cetera—that give some pause about their sustainability,” said the 33-year-old structural engineer. “But the reductions are still welcomed.”

‘Significant progress’


Fed officials aren’t likely to change interest rates when they meet later this month, Jan. 30-31.

They use a separate inflation gauge, the personal-consumption-expenditures price index, to determine whether they are achieving their 2% inflation goal. That Commerce Department index will be released later this month. Based on Thursday’s report, private-sector forecasters say the Fed’s preferred gauge is likely to show core prices rose by no more than 0.2% in December, a level consistent with the Fed’s target.

Inflation using that gauge has fallen to just over 2.5%, a “clearly positive development,” said New York Fed President John Williams in remarks Wednesday. While he indicated the central bank still has “a ways to go to get inflation back” to the target, he called out “significant progress” bringing down inflation for labor-intensive services, which many economists think will be the most difficult part of the Fed’s inflation fight.

Most officials have indicated that they made their final rate increase last July, when they lifted their benchmark rate to a range between 5.25% and 5.5%, a 23-year high. 

Many indicated they will eventually want to lower rates if inflation continues to decline because otherwise, holding rates steady would lead inflation-adjusted or “real” rates to rise, creating an unnecessarily restrictive setting. Officials anticipated at least three rate cuts this year at their December meeting. 

As a result, markets widely expect the Fed’s next move will be to lower rates, with many anticipating the first reduction in March. Inflation readings in the months to come could have a much bigger bearing on when the central bank makes its first cut. “It will only be appropriate to dial back the degree of policy restraint when we are confident that inflation is moving toward 2% on a sustained basis,” Williams said on Wednesday.

Crosscurrents in the New Year
Inflation has come down as factory production, supply chains and consumer habits have normalized and, more recently, as labor markets have cooled. 

Americans foresee a slower pace of price gains in the coming years. That is important because these expectations can be self-perpetuating, since consumers are more likely to demand bigger raises and be more resigned to paying higher prices if they expect high inflation. Consumers’ median expectation for annual inflation three years from now was 2.6% in December, the lowest since 2020, according to a New York Fed survey. 

Falling prices for many grocery items and a downward trend for gasoline costs since touching pandemic highs are important drivers of consumers’ views. Grocery prices climbed just 1.3% over the past year—around the same as the average increase in the decade before the pandemic—though costs were still up 24.8% from before the pandemic due largely to the 2022 price surge.

Meanwhile, pump prices fell 1.9% in December from a year earlier. More recent data shows that slide has continued in January: The price of regular unleaded gasoline is now $3.08 a gallon, down from $3.15 a month ago, according to energy-data and analytics provider OPIS. 

Rental-price gains have also slowed, and economists expect a sharper deceleration in the months ahead. 


Still, some sources of underlying price pressure on the services side are proving persistent. Bill Adams, chief economist at Comerica Bank, said the biggest frustration in Thursday’s report was that restaurant prices climbed 5.2% from a year earlier, barely slowing from November’s pace.

“Wages for lower-paid occupations like restaurant jobs are growing faster than the U.S. average, creating price pressures that restaurants are passing on in higher prices,” he said.

Meanwhile, consumer spending has held up well, as easing inflation and strong wage growth boosted purchasing power. 

While a promising sign for the economy, this resilience could stall the pace of improvement in inflation, said Pooja Sriram, U.S. economist at Barclays. “Activity is slowing, but it’s not slow. Labor-market conditions are moderating, but they’re still fairly tight,” she said. “So we’re a little circumspect about whether this disinflation can proceed as rapidly as what we’ve seen.”

ARTICLE 2
Americans Begin to Believe Inflation Is Cooling
Inflation has been coming off the boil for a while, but now people are starting to notice
By Justin Lahart

Jan. 11, 2024 10:56 am ET

The latest inflation data suggests prices are not continuing to fall as they had in late 2023. WSJ’s Dion Rabouin explains how that could play a big role in determining the Fed’s path in 2024. Photo: Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty Images
It matters that inflation is lower now than it was a year ago. It also matters that people’s inflation expectations are moving lower.

The Labor Department on Thursday reported that consumer prices rose a seasonally adjusted 0.3% in December from November, putting them up 3.4% from a year earlier. That compares with a 3.1% year-over-year increase in November. But core prices, which exclude often volatile food and energy items in an effort to better capture inflation’s underlying trend, were up 3.9% from a year earlier—the first time they have risen less than 4% since May 2021.

The cooling trend seems likely to continue. One reason why is that the Labor Department’s measure of housing costs for both owners and renters is derived from rents, but it significantly lags behind what is happening with rents on newly signed leases.

New rent prices have been cooling significantly, as seen in data from private providers such as Zillow, as well as a new tenant rent index that the Labor Department has begun producing. This has yet to fully show up in the inflation report’s measure of shelter prices, which was up 6.2% from a year earlier in December, accounting for 2.1 percentage points of the increase in overall prices.

It will show up in the months ahead—something that Federal Reserve policymakers know, which is part of why they have ended their rate-increasing campaign and are now considering eventual cuts. Those cuts might not come as soon as March, as many investors expect, in part because inflation hardly looks icy, but also because the job market still looks healthy: Also on Thursday, the Labor Department reported that initial claims for unemployment remained strikingly low.

But the central bank’s comfort level with rate cuts is clearly rising. One reason why is that the past few years’ bout of inflation never got strongly ingrained in people’s behavior, and lately Americans’ inflation expectations have begun to fall. Earlier this week, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York reported that among consumers it surveyed last month, the median expected increase in prices over the next year came to 3%. That was down from a high of 6.8% the monthly survey registered in June 2022, and not far from the average of 2.7% seen in the five years before the pandemic.

Short-term inflation expectations are often just a reflection of whatever is happening with gasoline prices, and of course lately gasoline prices have been down. The average price of a gallon of regular was $3.08 on Thursday, according to AAA, versus $3.27 a year earlier, and a June 2022 peak of $5.02. In 30 states, a gallon of regular cost less than $3. That said, longer-term inflation expectations are slipping, too: The New York Fed survey showed that expectations for inflation over the next three years came to 2.6% last month, versus an October 2021 high of 4.2%. Last month’s reading was a bit below the prepandemic average.

Policymakers care about inflation expectations because they believe those expectations can feed into actual inflation. If workers believe that high inflation is here to stay, for example, they will agitate for wage increases above and beyond the price increases they have already seen. Similarly, businesses will raise prices in an effort to head off the margin squeeze they expect. And so inflation becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy.

If Americans are expecting less inflation, it becomes more reasonable to expect the Fed to cut rates.

ARTICLE 3

U.S. deficit tops half a trillion dollars in the first quarter of fiscal year
PUBLISHED THU, JAN 11 20242:00 PM
Jeff Cox

KEY POINTS
For the period from October 2023 through December 2023, the budget deficit totaled just shy of $510 billion, following a shortfall of $129.4 billion in December alone.
The deficit has continued to pile up despite the Biden administration’s assurances that the Inflation Reduction Act, in addition to reducing prices, would shave “hundreds of billions” off the deficit.

The U.S. government ran up another half a trillion dollars in red ink in the first quarter of its fiscal year, the Treasury Department reported Thursday.

For the period from October 2023 through December 2023, the budget deficit totaled just shy of $510 billion, following a shortfall of $129.4 billion in just December alone, which was 52% higher than a year ago. The jump in the deficit pushed total government debt past $34 trillion for the first time.

Compared to last year, which saw a final deficit of $1.7 trillion, 2024 is running even hotter.

In the first quarter of fiscal 2023, for example, the difference between spending and receipts totaled $421.4 billion. On an unadjusted basis, that’s an increase of $89 billion between fiscal 2024 and last year. Adjusted for calendar factors, the Treasury Department said the change between the two years is actually $97 billion. December’s shortfall was higher by more than $34 billion compared to the previous year, driven by higher Social Security payments and interest costs.

If the current pace continues, 2024 would end with a deficit of just more than $2 trillion.

The deficit has continued to pile up despite the Biden administration’s assurances that the Inflation Reduction Act, in addition to reducing prices, would shave “hundreds of billions” off the deficit.

While the rate of inflation has come down, Labor Department data Thursday showed the consumer price index increased another 0.3% in December, pushing the 12-month rate up to 3.4%, higher than the Wall Street consensus and above the Federal Reserve’s 2% goal.

With interest rates elevated as the Fed fights inflation, financing costs for the government in 2023 totaled nearly $660 billion. Debt as a percentage of gross domestic product rose to 120% in the third quarter of 2023.
